Verifiable Digital Crenditals blog (#1639)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2026-04-27-verifiable-digital-credentials.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How Verifiable Digital Credentials Are Reshaping Trust Architecture"
author: akanksha-bhasin
by: advocate
communities: [devops,security,mobile,.net,java,javascript,go,php,python,ruby]

> description: ""

Reviewer: Please add a description. this is used in social previews

tags: []
image: blog/verifiable-digital-credentials/verifiable-digital-credentials-social-image.jpg
type: awareness
---

The identity stack is getting a new layer, and it's already in your users' pockets. Mobile driver's licenses are live in dozens of U.S. states. The EU is mandating digital identity wallets for hundreds of millions of citizens. Apple Wallet and Google Wallet already hold government-issued credentials. Yet most development teams are not building for it.

> The layer is called Verifiable Digital Credentials. The issuer infrastructure is already live with wallets deployed, standards stable. What's lagging is the verifier side, and that's where the interesting engineering work is right now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The layer is called Verifiable Digital Credentials. The issuer infrastructure is already live, with wallets deployed and standards stable. What's lagging is the verifier side, and that's where the interesting engineering work is right now.
```
"interesting" engineering work? Do you mean "that's where we're focusing engineering work right now"?
or something like that? The use of "interesting" in this context may imply other required engineering work is not interesting or it's tedious. Let's not imply that.

Reviewer: Grammarly. Please make sure you run the post through Grammarly

> For years, when applications needed to verify something about a user, their age, their license, their employment status, the answer was document uploads, third-party verification APIs, and centralized storage of personally identifiable information (PII). It worked. But it accumulated cost at every step: data your infrastructure had to protect, compliance obligations that grew with every sensitive record, manual review queues that created friction, and third-party vendors holding your users' identity data on your behalf.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't seem quite right. Change to either 

> For years, when applications needed to verify something about a user, such as their age, their license, or their employment status, the answer defaulted to uploads, third-party verification APIs, and centralized storage of personally identifiable information (PII). 

or

> For years, when applications needed to verify a user's age, license, or employment status, the default methods were document uploads, third-party verification APIs, and centralized storage of personally identifiable information (PII).

Also changed the second clause of the sentence. Pick from either. once again it just doesn't seem quite right.

VDCs replace that model. A trusted authority, such as a DMV, a university, or an employer, issues a cryptographically signed credential. The user holds it in a wallet. Your application requests the specific proof it needs. The credential validates itself. You record the outcome and move on. No document stored. No PII beyond what the transaction required. No third-party in the middle.

The technical foundation relies on the **Issuer-Holder-Verifier trust triangle**: the Issuer signs the credential, the Holder stores it in a digital wallet, and the Verifier, your application, requests exactly the proof it needs. This model enables selective disclosure, where a verifier can confirm a person meets an age threshold without ever seeing their date of birth, home address, or a photo of their physical ID. By moving from document collection to claim validation, you eliminate manual review queues and dramatically reduce the personal data your infrastructure is obligated to protect.

> {% img blog/verifiable-digital-credentials/image1.jpg alt:" " width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Reviewer: Please add alt tags.

Reviewer: Applies to all images

## Authentication proves identity. Credentials prove claims.

The most important distinction in the VDC space is also the most commonly missed.

Authentication answers one question: is this user the legitimate owner of this account? Verification answers a completely different question: can this person prove a specific attribute about themselves, their age, their license, their employment status, their eligibility?

These are not the same problem. We have spent the last decade perfecting the art of logging users in, OpenID Connect, passkeys, strong MFA, but stretching your auth layer to carry verification responsibilities it was never designed for produces login flows that collect far more than they need to, and systems that are harder to evolve as both concerns grow independently.

The right architecture keeps them separate: authentication establishes the session, and VDC-based verification handles moments when a higher-trust signal is required.

{% img blog/verifiable-digital-credentials/image2.jpg alt:" " width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> In practice, those moments cluster around a recognizable set of product checkpoints: age gating for regulated goods, step-up verification before sensitive account actions, professional license checks, workforce credential validation, and high-value transactions. These are the natural insertion points for VDC-based verification. Not a replacement for your auth stack. An additional layer, deployed precisely where trust requirements spike.

Reviewer: > where trust requirements spike

what does this mean?

> ## **The standards stack: What you need to know before you build**

Reviewer: No need to bold header text

**mdoc (ISO 18013-5/7)** - the format behind mobile driver's licenses and government-issued digital IDs. More tightly governed interoperability environment, stricter format expectations, more prescribed wallet behavior. If your use case touches government-issued identity, this is your lane.

**Protocols** - define how credentials move between issuers, wallets, and verifiers. Two specs from the OpenID for Verifiable Credentials family handle both sides of the lifecycle:

**OpenID4VCI** governs issuance - how a wallet obtains a credential from an issuer. The issuer-side handshake. **OpenID4VP** governs presentation - how a wallet delivers proof of a claim to your application. It is credential-format agnostic, supports redirect-based flows today, and the Digital Credentials API for web-native UX where supported.

**The W3C Digital Credentials API** - the runtime layer that makes this usable in a browser. Its role is directly analogous to what WebAuthn does for passkeys: it standardizes how browsers invoke credential wallets, gives users proper consent context, and eliminates the custom URL scheme and deep link hacks that make wallet invocation brittle today.

> In simple terms: the **Digital Credentials API invokes the wallet**, **OpenID4VCI and OpenID4VP manage the protocol flow**, and **SD-JWT VC or mdoc define the credential format**. These layers are complementary, not interchangeable. Architect accordingly.

Reviewer: The phrase "Architect accordingly." is not helpful. Based on what I read so far, I'm not sure I understand actionable architecture. Either provide examples/concrete use cases, or remove this phrase.

## **Verification is not just a valid signature**

> This is where production-ready VDC implementations diverge from those that look correct but fail in the real world. Cryptographic signature validation is necessary, but it is not sufficient. A credential can have a mathematically valid signature and still be unacceptable in your application's context. What determines acceptability is ecosystem trust.

Reviewer: this is a pretty harsh, negative statement. Can we soften? Also, what is "This" in the context? 

> Verifying digital credentials requires factors beyond cryptographic signature validity. Robust VDC verifier implementations include X and Y.

or something like that?

Two concepts are non-negotiable in any verifier-side implementation:

**Trust List** - the curated set of issuers and signing keys your verifier accepts as authoritative. Think of it as conceptually equivalent to a browser's root CA store. If the issuer is not on your trust list, the credential is invalid in your context regardless of signature validity.

**Trust Framework** - the policy and governance rules defining who can participate in the ecosystem and under what conditions. This is the legal and business contract behind the cryptography.

> In the U.S. mDL ecosystem, for example, state DMVs publish their signing keys through the AAMVA Digital Trust Service, which serves as a trust anchor for Issuing Authority Certificate Authorities (IACAs). Your verification flow needs to integrate with that trust source and handle key rotation as issuers update their infrastructure. Treat trust framework integration as a first-class architectural requirement from day one, not a post-launch polish item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the U.S. mDL ecosystem, for example, state DMVs publish their signing keys through the AAMVA Digital Trust Service, which serves as a trust anchor for Issuing Authority Certificate Authorities (IACAs). Your verification flow must integrate with that trust source and handle key rotation as issuers update their infrastructure. Build the trust framework integration as a first-class architectural requirement during implementation.
```

## **Progressive enhancement and the path forward**

> The browser rollout of native APIs is still progressing. Developers should not architect a flow that requires the Digital Credentials API as a hard dependency today. The most resilient path is to build on redirect-based OpenID4VP as your baseline, it works universally without specific browser dependencies, and layer in the Digital Credentials API as a progressive enhancement to provide a first-class UX where supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The browser rollout of native APIs is still progressing. Developers should not architect a flow that requires the Digital Credentials API as a hard dependency today. The most resilient path is to build on redirect-based OpenID4VP as your baseline; it works universally without specific browser dependencies, and layer in the Digital Credentials API as a progressive enhancement to provide a first-class UX where supported.
```

The practical path for engineering teams is incremental. Start with one verification moment in your product where the current approach creates measurable friction or accumulates unnecessary data liability. Define the minimum claim that moment actually requires. Keep it separate from your auth layer. Build something bounded. Learn from it. Expand.

The identity stack is getting a new layer. The developers who understand the formats, protocols, trust model, and browser reality are the ones who will architect what comes next. That window is open now, and the gap between where issuer infrastructure is and where verifier-side development is means there is real ground to gain for teams that move early.

The question for every senior engineer reading this is not whether VDCs are coming. They are already here. The question is whether your architecture is ready to meet them.

> ## Further reading

Reviewer: As prevously mentioned, this header definitely needs to change.

As a CTA, does it make sense to add a checklist? Maybe before this header?

Reviewer: Also, should there be a call out about joining the beta?
